---
published: true
layout: single
title: Challenge Gov
subhead: A Case Study on The Western Pennsylvania Regional Data Center (WPRDC)
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Cities
  - Data
pubdate: ‘May 01 2022'
date: 2022-12-01
author: Abhi Nemani
img: wprdc2.jpg
redirect\_from: 
  - /blog/regional-data/
  - /blog/wprdc/
---
Executive Summary
City-owned properties are a critical piece of institutional and urban infrastructure, and no facility is more so than City Hall. However, as urbanization has evolved and urban cores have shifted, the utility of historical City Halls has come into question — as have their maintenance costs (Koppenjan & Enserink, 2009). However, examples from other cities suggest that this decision is not as simple as comparing proposals on a balance sheet. City Hall plays fiscal, economic, and historical/civic roles (Sclar, 2015). This memo provides context on these three issues, applies them to the emerging proposals, and closes with recommendations on advancing this discussion — an RFI, community survey, and impact study — in line with St. Louis’ commitments to smart growth, financial health, and resident engagement (Newell, 2004; Emerine et al., 2006; SLEDP, 2022a, 2022b).
Background
Many other downtown regions are organized and built around their downtowns, and in recent years these cities have had to ask hard questions about their flagship civic facility. Based on a review of the literature as well as case studies from Boston and Long Beach, three central concerns stand out for our city’s leadership to consider (City of Boston, 2022; Madans, 2019):
Fiscal Impact: City Hall, as a property and facility, plays a significant fiscal role: the asset itself provides collateral and equity for the city, helping its credit rating, but ownership comes with maintenance and other fees (Newell, 2004). 
Community Impact (Smart Growth & Legacy): Cities have seized the economic opportunity to relocate or redevelop their city halls to drive development downtown (Montgomery, 2014). Leaders should be mindful of the unique role City Halls play in civic life, in the community’s history and legacy, and the local economy – as well as its ancillary “smart growth” implications (Montgomery, 2014; Sclar, 2015).
Alternatives & Analysis
 The above criteria provide a helpful framework to evaluate these three options:  (1) sell and lease new space; (2) improve the existing building through public funds; (3) redevelop the current complex through a P3. 
1. Sell City Hall & Lease New Space
There is a growing record of historical public institutions being repurposed into private businesses: city halls can turn into banks, banks can turn into co-working spaces, and office spaces can turn into pop-up stores (Sclar, 2015).
Fiscal Impact
The prospect of selling City Hall, if marketable, is compelling for the short-term fiscal ledger: the council report suggests the property could sell for $24M, padding the city’s coffers as the region and country face uncertain economic times.  On the other hand, the City of Boston attempted to sell its City Hall in the early 2000s, under the reasonable impression that there might be a better home for their operations and better use for that building (Montgomery, 2014). However, the market did not agree, which should caution the feasibility of turning over such a unique piece of real estate (Montgomery, 2014).
Community Impact 
The sale of City Hall could be beneficial or problematic for growth, depending on the new owner’s strategic plan. The legacy of urban privatization is mixed (Liang & Ashuri, 2021). Typical risks include gentrification-induced displacement and high-income inequality (Newell, 2004). New ownership could lead to new development, which, if smartly managed, could benefit the community, but city government influence would be limited (Emerine et al., 2006). Further, in a post-COVID workplace, physical locations may be losing their relevance, so the visibility of a giant public edifice could be considered anachronous. Indeed, some agencies have begun using co-working or shared spaces for their in-person teams (Adams, 2016; Renner, 2017). On the other hand, moving from a highly visible landmark for civic participation to a faceless office park could come at a cost to civic engagement.
2. Renovate Current City Hall
A common approach for cities with historical city halls, like St. Louis, is to upgrade the facilities for a more modern work environment (Montgomery, 2014; Adams, 2016). Some of these enhancements are typical for any aging building — better communications technology, for example — but for cities, the changes within the city government also require a rethinking of the spaces in use (Adams, 2016). Many departments have changed size, and some are new: for instance, the IT department has shrunk while the call center (i.e., 311) continues to grow. A functioning city would require a functional city hall.
Fiscal Impact
Although ongoing costs — expected to be similar to current levels — are baked into the annual budget, new money would require either cutting from other expenses in the general fund or issuing a new bond or levy. Renovating City Hall would require a roughly $10 million near-term financial investment. It should be noted that Boston has recently chosen to self-finance a redevelopment of its City Hall complex not only with modern features but also with robust meeting spaces (City of Boston, 2022). Boston’s renovation is expected to cost over $75 million and continues to grow in price, so St. Louis’ initial estimates may be soft (Smithson, 2021).
Community Impact 
An internal upgrade to City Hall would not likely directly impact the local economy or community since the building, or its surroundings would not be expected to change. That said, improvements to meeting spaces (e.g., council chambers) could open up access to participation. Moreover, as in the Boston example, the city can earn recognition and praise from the community for actively engaging them in the City Hall planning process and creating the building as a platform for civic life (City of Boston, 2022; Smithson, 2021). 
3. Redevelop City Hall Complex in Public-Private Partnership
Renovating comes at high costs, but redevelopment or a new development costs even more. Many governments have looked to new models to finance their evolving public infrastructure needs (Koppenjan & Enserink, 2009; Renner, 2017; Sclar, 2015). In the realm of public infrastructure, a standard model is for cities to work with a private bank or investor to raise significant capital (outside bonds) to not only redevelop the building but re-energize the commercial opportunities in the area – through public-private partnerships, P3s (Koppenjan & Enserink, 2009). P3s have been responsible for many notable parks, libraries, and most recently, the new City Hall of Long Beach, California, which secured over $200M in funding to revamp its City Hall and its surrounding civic spaces. 
Fiscal Impact
P3s fiscal advantage comes in their limited near-term outlay. By leveraging the city’s building ownership as collateral, while the private sector takes on the liability, the city’s coffers may seemingly take no significant hit. However, the varied history of P3s suggests that may be a rosy outlook. The previous P3 — the nearby courthouse — was over-budget and behind schedule even in Long Beach (Madans, 2019). These “costs” may not immediately appear on the city’s balance sheets as the partners handle construction. Still, the risk comes in the unknown management fees the private partners charge post-construction. In this way, P3s do not reduce fiscal risk, just delay it: they are no panacea for infrastructure financing.
Community Impact 
Unlike the other options, the P3 strategy has economic growth and development baked into it. The motivation for the private partners is financial, and the alignment of civic and financial interests is the center stone of “smart growth” (Emerine et al., 2006). Moreover, the notion of a P3 itself is a kind of legacy: suggesting a new dynamic of collaboration within the community. Nonetheless, the same issues around gentrification and inequity emerge with P3s, and in St. Louis, P3s have an uneven track record, notably the Rams relocation and subsequent lawsuit (SLEDP, 2022a, 2022b). Political reception could be mixed.
Further, even though private and public interests can align, they can just as quickly misalign. For example, the Bryant Park P3 has been lauded for revitalizing an overlooked civic property, but its privatization has led to significant civic issues (Elstein, 2016). Private spaces can be privately controlled, meaning civil liberties could be curtailed — images of private police silencing protestors at Bryant Park went viral during the Black Lives Matters protests. 
Conclusion & Next Steps
In sum, a P3 promises more control and opportunities than a sale, at a lower immediate cost than a renovation. However, this memo should illustrate the complexity and unpredictability of any and all options, including the P3. The general financial estimates provided for the three options should be the beginning of a discussion, not the end: many important questions remain to be answered, and financial impact is one of many criteria. Accordingly, the City Council should consider the following next steps:
Prepare Request for Information: Per Long Beach’s example, the City can publish a Request for Information (RFI), using this memo as a guide, for potential P3 models (Newell, 2004).
Poll City Staff & Residents: To be mindful of the people living near and working in City Hall, any plan should involve rigorous community input online and offline forums and surveys (Newell, 2004; SLEDP, 2022a, 2022b).
Economic Impact Study: The City should consider commissioning an economic impact study to forecast the local and regional implications of a change to City Hall.

References
Adams, E. (2016). BP Adams Launches “Smart City” Public-Private Partnership at Brooklyn Borough Hall. Targeted News Service. http://www.proquest.com/docview/1787724625/citation/372222E50A494420PQ/1
ARUP. (2016). Arup: Long Beach Civic Center Hits Financial Close—Document—Gale OneFile: Fine Arts. https://go-gale-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/ps/i.do?p=PPFA&u=usocal_main&id=GALE|A450680653&v=2.1&it=r
City of Boston. (2022). City Hall Plaza renovation. Boston.Gov. https://www.boston.gov/departments/public-facilities/city-hall-plaza-renovation
Elstein, A. (2016). Shaping a neighborhood’s destiny from the shadows. Crain’s New York Business. https://www.crainsnewyork.com/article/20160918/REAL_ESTATE/160919896/clean-operators-or-shadow-governments-critics-of-bids-say-it-s-time-to-bid-adieu-to-city-s-business-improvemen
Emerine, D., Shenot, C., & Bailey, M. K. (2006). This is Smart Growth. ICMA & EPA. https://icma.org/documents/smart-growth
Koppenjan, J. F. M., & Enserink, B. (2009). Public-Private Partnerships in Urban Infrastructures: Reconciling Private Sector Participation and Sustainability. Public Administration Review, 69(2), 284–296.
Liang, Y., & Ashuri, B. (2021). Challenges and enabling features of small and medium infrastructure public–private partnerships (P3s): A case study of the US P3 infrastructure market. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 29(1), 49–71. https://doi.org/10.1108/ECAM-09-2020-0720
Madans, H. (2019). Construction Wraps on Long Beach Center: New City Hall and port headquarters to open this month—Document—Gale Power Search. Los Angeles Business Journal. https://go-gale-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/ps/i.do?p=GPS&u=usocal_main&id=GALE|A595253013&v=2.1&it=r
Montgomery, T. (2014). A Seismic Retrofit To Rehabilitate The Long Beach Civic Center [Columbia University](). https://doi.org/10.7916/D8SJ1J4G
Newell, C. (2004). The Effective Local Government Manager (3rd edition). ICMA. https://icma.org/publications/effective-local-government-manager-3rd-edition-pdf
Renner, C. (2017). Taking the P3 route to reinvent Downtown (Public Management). ICMA. https://go-gale-com.libproxy2.usc.edu/ps/i.do?p=PPBE&u=usocal_main&id=GALE|A506675952&v=2.1&it=r
Sclar, E. (2015). The political economics of investment Utopia: Public–private partnerships for urban infrastructure finance. Journal of Economic Policy Reform, 18(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/17487870.2014.950857
SLEDP. (2022a). Business Development. St. Louis Economic Development Partnership. https://stlpartnership.com/who-we-are/our-teams/business-development/
SLEDP. (2022b). What We Do. St. Louis Economic Development Partnership. https://stlpartnership.com/what-we-do/
Smithson, A. (2021). Sasaki’s extensive renovation of Boston City Hall Plaza is moving along. The Architect’s Newspaper. https://www.archpaper.com/2021/09/sasakis-extensive-renovation-of-boston-city-hall-plaza-is-moving-along/

